---
title: Burnout
layout: post
date: 2017-06-18T20:03:34+01:00
---

# Burnout

Burnout is a tricky thing... It's slow, subtle.  No single event is 'Burnout'.  Everyone is wired differently. Whatever burnout means to me or you likely means something different to someone else.  To anyone with Burnout on their radar these are reasonable statements to make. We've been there, felt it.  Come through it. We can look back and go, 'Ah, that was that then.'  Ask someone else to describe their experience or read about it online and we will find stories that differ from our own.

It's also not a one time thing.  Burnout isn't chicken pox. It's mental fatigue.  Left unchecked our brains will run us into the ground.  There's no rest day where your brain doesn't go to the gym.  We can learn from it, better look after ourselves.  We can see it coming before it hits.  But make no mistake: it's never finished.  It's never gone.

## My experience

I found it was the day to day that got me.  Nothing major.  Things we all have to deal with at some point or another.  Workloads increased and as a result I found myself working later.  When I didn't work later I'd worked harder, my brain struggling to keep up with the stuff it was working on.  Returning home I struggled to think, to prioritise things correctly.  Things that needed to be done were replaced with things that I wanted to do.  'Washing up', 'Cooking', became things like 'TV shows', 'Gym'.  Tensions slowly rose in the household over me not pulling my weight.  'Gym' dropped off the list and was replaced by 'Chores', which often had built up throughout the weeks so that completing them took hours instead of minutes.  Eventually household apathy spread to my partner: like hell she was going to do my crap for me and rightly so.  Meals became a none daily event: if there was washing up to be done and there often was, then there was no space to cook.  With fewer, less healthy meals and a suffering living space, the brain numbed out to the problems.

As time progressed the hours got pushed later and later to fit everything in.  By the time chores were completed it was often 11PM. To get any of 'my stuff' done it would mean pushing the midnight oil later and later... 12AM... 1AM... 2:30AM... Already uncomfortable mornings became horribly rushed affairs, struggling to meet even the flexible hours my workplace offered.  Days: spent tired.  Nights: spent tired.  Weekends time for all the things not completed during the week: 4:30AM finishes... Horribly inefficient days where tasks that were simple enough to get done took too long.  Those that didn't got pushed back for other weekends.  Thing's like 'have a shave' would take days. A haircut; 3 weeks from deciding to do it to it getting done -- I clocked it.  Weekends spent socialising with friends or family were weekends wasted: stuff to do, stuff not getting done.  Personal projects went from being things like 'have a play with Docker to see if we can use it', to 'open mail'.

In work, my brain lagged.  Tasks became blocked.  Taking longer than required. Often requiring input from other people.  Reviewing our time tracking system there were gaps that couldn't be explained, even to myself.  Too much time spent between tasks struggling to figure out what to do next.  When I was asked what was going on clear answers were beyond my grasp.  Flags were raised, likely long before I even realised it.  

The walks home from work were loud.  Traffic noises reverberated in my head playing back over themselves, unable to be filtered into background noise.  Ambient skies and lit shop windows glared enough for me to dip my head, squinting my eyes.  Everything around me melded into an internal weight that I was unable to process.  When pressed for change by the local homeless, I could barely register them.  My responses delayed, deliberate effort made to apologise for my lack of coins.  The walks to work were often missing from my memory.  On worse days, entire hours missing from the middle of the day.  When asked at home what I'd done that day in work: Shrug. 'Stuff'.

This hasn't happened once.  I'd say that so far this has happened at least twice since leaving university.  Probably more to a lesser extent.  Throughout there have been signs that something was not quite right; people around me noticing before I did; work noting that I'd not taken my allocated leave from the previous year; my partner pointing out the patterns of chore avoidance returning; Mum actively calling me out on the phone when my response to the question 'How are you doing?' was 'Surviving.'  She's good like that.

## Out of the mess of it all

I've noticed that on the rare occasion where I was able to exercise the benefits were significant and immediate.  My brain is clearly wired to respond positively to physical stress every now and then.  The problem with burnout is that difficult, stressful things are the first thing to be dropped from the list and once it is happening finding the time to regularly visit the gym is a big ask mentally.

There are definite periods where life isn't like this.  Things suddenly, often without any reason that I can see, snap back into focus and shit actually get's done for a while.  I'm in no way saying I've mastered this but with each wave of 'Burnout' there's more warning that it's happening:  The evening walks start hurting more subtly, but detectably; the people around me sometimes spot it before I do.  

The importance of a quality diet and regular nourishment has never been more apparent.  Time, while short is highly valued.  Late nights are still a thing, but the toll they take is measured before they happen. Exercise is very slowly making its way back into my weekly cycle.  Priorities are regularly reviewed to make sure that a) I'm happy, and b) my mental health is doing more than 'Surviving'.

So that's my experience.  To be continued.

