---
title: UX and Games Development
date: 2018-03-17T16:59:59+00:00
layout: post
image: images/wow-levitate-spriest-cropped.jpg
---

TLDR. When looking for inspiration.  Play video games.

I am a huge World of Warcraft fan.  I am a huge video games fan. But more so
then the rest, World of Warcraft has captured a little bit of me in a way that
I didn't really think was possible.  I don't just appreciate it as video game:
to me it's a technological beast of an application that has been successfully
developed and evolved to provide over 13 years of entertainment.

//Introduction to UX

Having worked alongside a number of designers over the last couple of years,
I've had a few conversations discussing what UX design is and how it differs
from other types of design.  There's usually a distinction that whatever you're
working on is usually a single of aspect of a users experience; the actions
leading up to your users interactions and following on from them are equally
important.

This feels surprisingly familiar to me.  It seems that the video games industry
has been living this philosophy for many years now, certainly longer than the
phrase 'UX' has been floating around my vicinity.  It's referred to as a
similarly ephemeral quality known as 'Gameplay'.  How does the game feel.

//What is gameeplay

All this comes together to form the 'gameplay'.  In a game like World of
Warcraft, the longevity and quantity of content means that all these elements
combine in so many different ways that inevitably it goes wrong.  At the time
of writing (2018) the system known as 'Titanforging' is a major point of
contention within the player base, with Blizzard already having announced plans
for a future iteration of the system in the upcoming expansion, Battle for
Azeroth. Patches are always in the works, and each expansion can arguably be
considered new game as opposed to some additional content.

The overall experience however extends far beyond the game world. The external
mobile applications that allow you to interact with the game while away from
your machine, the forums where players communicate and occasionally received
feedback from Blizzard in posts known as 'Blue Posts'.  The client the player
uses to maintain and update their game.  The streamed competitions, the live
conferences, the web store.  All these things contribute to the overall
experience a player has, and determines whether or not they'll move on
elsewhere or (like me) become life long fans.

So the next time you're working on something and aren't sure about how
something should 'feel' if your regular sources of inspiration aren't helping,
consider playing Video games.  They've been dealing with user experiences from
start to finish for years now.






